# TerraDreamer
Satellite based Earth observation (EO) has some very obvious and recognisable perfor-mance characteristics; however, traditional Earth observation methods are limited to simply labelling what is observed, rather than providing reasoning about the unobserved states of the planet. To this end, we present TerraDreamer, a generative world model of Earth observation that integrates spatial extrapolations, temporal forecasts, and counter-factual interventions into a unified framework, whereby model state information is gov-erned by conditions on actions taken. TerraDreamer also constructs a geo spatial latent representation of multi sensory observations, associating each observation token with its corresponding coordinate, time, sensor, and scale reference. As such, the model can utilise this common latent representation for querying unobserved spatially and temporally in the future, through the application of an intervention. TerraDreamer operates using a common transition operator to derive the state from the prior state by applying a general-ised action, which consists of querying, applying a temporal offset, and structured inter-vention. The transition head defines a probabilistic framework for producing an updated latent state from a prior state to account for the uncertainty inherent in Earth system fore-casting, while conditioning for the physical and geographical constraints of the system improves its realism and consistency. TerraDreamer is evaluated on the following tasks: temporally forecasting, spatially extrapolating, clearing clouds, predicting counterfactual change, and downstream transfer task performance. TerraDreamer outperformed recogni-tion oriented and task specific baseline models in the following areas: forecasting skill, predicting semantic change, providing physically consistent results, and producing suc-cessful transfer task performance.
